So, there are a lot of other
useful tricks that arrays can do.
We have a whole bunch of other
spells that we can cast on arrays.
So here are a few more.
Try them out,
try them out in your console,
take a guess before you hit enter or
before you type it in.
Take a guess as to what each of these is
going to produce or what you're gonna see.
And we're gonna talk about it in a second.
Okey-doke, so let's talk about it.
So what do you think .sort does?
It kind of does what it says on
the tin but to put words to it.
>> Sorts alphabetically.
>> So in this case since we have a bunch
of letters in our array or strings, right?
It's going to sort them alphabetically.
But this is a little bit tricky,
so let's talk about it.
So if I call this sort on this CADB array,
I'm gonna get the array a,
b, c, d may be expected.
What do you think happens if I do like 3,
4, 1, 2 sort?
>> 1, 2, 3, 4.
Okay, but
there are also some weird things like for
example, if I do 100, 1, 10.
We're going to get maybe what we'd expect,
if I do 100, 2, 50.
Is that what you'd expect?
So what's actually happening
here is because again,
JavaScript goes all loosey goosey,
is it's actually going to sort
based on the stringiness or
the sort of alphabetical order
of the things in the array.
So for example, 1, 10 and
100 come out in the right order because.
If we converted these all to strings.
That is how they would be
ordered alphabetically, right?
But the same is not true
if we converted 100,
2 and 50, to strings.
This is because 1 comes
before 2 alphabetically.
So 100,
it's kind of like starting with A, and
2 is sort of like starting with B,
and so on and so forth for 50.
So, be a little bit aware that sort
behaves maybe differently than you'd
expect in some cases, especially when
you're dealing with non-stringing values.
Okay, great.
How about this .join?
Can anybody describe what
happens when we do this .join?
>> Joins the variables
with whatever specified.
>> So it joins the,
I'm gonna say values in the array.
Cuz we haven't actually
assigned any variables here,
joins the values in the array using
a string joiner that we pass in.
So if we pass in lions and
tigers and, sorry, lions, tigers,
bears my, and join them with a and
surrounded by spaces,
we're going to get the straight one-string
lions and tigers and bears my, yeah?
So this can be really useful for when
you don't wanna type out like let's say.
Let's say I have my first name and
my last name.
And I don't want to type out kind of,
let's say, I don't wanna type out.
Let me assign this to an array.
Okay, so if I don't wanna type
out something like names.
0, plus, space, plus, names,
1 to get my full name,
it can be quicker to just say names.join
and put a space between them, boom.
So join is a pretty handy,
little spell or trick that arrays can do.
And how about this last one, concat.
What did folks find out happens here?
Maybe the chat wants to chime in
with what concat has been doing, or
they think will do?
So we saw, yep.
>> Joins the elements to the array.
>> Joins the elements to array, okay.
Yeah, or another word.
So concat is short for
a word that we talked about yesterday.
>> Adds 456 to the array.
Okay, so we're gonna end up
with a bigger array, right?
So concat, is gonna give us
an array that kind of squishes
these two arrays together,
into a single array.
And concat is short for a word that
we ran into with strings yesterday.
Anybody remember a word we encountered,
concat?
>> Concatenate.
>> Tenate, concatenate.
Exactly, so this concatenates or
joins together two different arrays,
to give us one array with all
of the elements of both arrays.
Another handy trick.
Okay.
Now, there are a lot of other
things that arrays can do.
And so again, our friend MDN.
If we go to MDN, and we type in array.
We'll find a whole long list of methods
and things that we can do with array,
there's a whole long list of
stuff that arrays can do,
which we do not have time
to talk about all of.
But you can go through and read more
about any of these magic tricks that
they can do, and
also find out certain details about them.
Like for example concat,
we can say it's used to merge two or
more arrays and it returns a new array.
We're gonna talk about what that means in
a second but so you can see examples, etc.
So you can check out MDN for
way more stuff that arrays can do.
Cool?
Cool, any questions so far?
>> I couldn't use push instead of concat,
so push can only do only one?
>> So, let's find out what happens.
This is the best way to figure out
what stuff does, in my opinion,
is to mess with stuff when
it's a non-crucial time.
So since this is our time to experiment,
let's see what happens when we, if
I put push here, I'm not gonna type it yet
because the browser is gonna spoiler it.
We said push, when we were looking before,
and we said, okay,
let's say, I do just push for,
what am I expecting to see when I do this?
>> 1, 2, 3, 4?
>> An array with 1, 2, 3, 4, yeah.
Thank you.
Oops sorry, no,
it's just actually [LAUGH].
I'd have to capture the array.
Sorry, so push is going to return the
value of the element that it just added,
and not the value of the array.
So first I have to capture the array.
Double check that it's what I thought.
So then if I do push for.
Now if I ask for a,
I'll see that it has four things.
Okay, now what happens if I do push and
then make a new array with,
where are we at 5, 6, 7, let's say.
So we said push adds an element
to the end of the array.
So let's take a guess.
What do you all think this is gonna do?
We have a question.
Maybe it's going to do
the same thing as the cat.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> Thank you, ma'am.
>> Any other guesses?
>> Does it put the array
in there as the last item?
>> It might put the array 5, 6,
7 in there as the last item.
Or it might put each of those things in
there as the last item, let's find out.
Looks like we've now got an array with,
so, sorry.
What did I say before?
I might have said push returns the value
of the thing that we added, that's wrong.
Push returns the new length of the array.
Haven't had enough coffee yet.
And that's why it returned 5 here,
because it says now we've got
an array with five things in it,
the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4,
and an array with 5, 6, 7.
So this is what's called a nested array.
Now we have an array within an array,
and we can have arrays,
within arrays, within arrays.
JavaScript doesn't care what kinds
of things you put in your arrays.
So we can even put in arrays, objects,
all kinds of different stuff.
So push and concat do work differently,
and they're going to do different things.
Now, tomorrow we're gonna talk more about
a fancy piece of JavaScript
syntax that we can use
to extract the individual
elements from an array.
That can make it a little bit easier
if you're trying to add multiple
things from an array.
So, don't wanna get into that right
now cuz it might distract us.
But tomorrow, when we look later
at some fancy JavaScript syntax,
we will find a shorthand way to
kind of get multiple elements
out of an array so
that we can work with them individually.